Conducting is the art of directing a musical performance, such as a choral 
concert, by way of visible gestures with the hands, arms, face and head. The 
primary duties of the conductor or choirmaster are to unify performers, set the 
tempo, execute clear preparations and beats (meter), and to listen critically 
and shape the sound of the ensemble.[2]

The conductor or choral director typically stands on a raised platform and he 
or she may or may not use a baton (using a baton creates more visible gestures. 
Many choral conductors use their hands to conduct. In the 2010s, most 
conductors do not play an instrument when conducting, although in earlier 
periods of classical music history, leading an ensemble while playing an 
instrument was common. In Baroque music from the 1600s to the 1750s, conductors 
performing in the 2010s may lead an ensemble while playing a harpsichord or 
the violin (see Concertmaster). Conducting while playing a piano may also be 
done with musical theatre pit orchestras. Communication is typically non-verbal 
during a performance (this is strictly the case in art music, but in jazz big 
bands or large pop ensembles, there may be occasional spoken instructions). 
However, in rehearsals, frequent interruptions allow the conductor to give 
verbal directions as to how the music should be sung.

Conductors act as guides to the choirs they conduct. They choose the works to 
be performed and study their scores, to which they may make certain adjustments 
(e.g., regarding tempo, repetitions of sections, assignment of vocal solos and 
so on), work out their interpretation, and relay their vision to the singers. 
Choral conductors may also have to conduct instrumental ensembles such as 
orchestras if the choir is singing a piece for choir and orchestra. They may 
also attend to organizational matters, such as scheduling rehearsals,[3] 
planning a concert season, hearing auditions, and promoting their ensemble in 
the media.